hey friends i'd love to talk to you
today about our sponsor audible
so i'm a huge fan of audible i've been a
customer of theirs for over a decade now
um i really love listening to audiobooks
i found that as i've gotten busier and
busier it's hard to find the time to
actually read
and the other real challenge is that you
know we're so concerned about
screen time and eye strain that i've
really come to love audiobooks
i tend to combine them with other things
that i don't want to do so suddenly
things like chores are doing the dishes
activities that i generally
procrastinate on are things that i sort
of combine with the dopamine enjoyment
of listening to a gripping audiobook
i'm listening to rage of dragons by evan
winter right now it's an
epic book really love it makes doing the
dishes really enjoyable
so i'd really recommend that you all
check out audible's free trial uh it's
30 day it's a 30 day free trial right
now
and also check out the audible plus
program which i'm a huge fan of
so you get one free book a month and in
addition to that you get access to their
plus catalog
and what i love about that is that the
plus catalog has a lot of audiobooks
that i may not necessarily want to
buy but you can still get access to so i
do a lot of my non-fiction listening
and learning through the plus catalog so
if you all are interested you all can
check out
audible.com healthygamer or text
healthygamer to 500 500.
hey guys dr k here so today i'd like to
do something a little bit different
here at healthy gamer we want to start
sharing case studies with you
which are examples of particular um
people that i've worked with or people
from our community and we're going to
kind of explain a little bit about who
they
are and kind of what the problem they
struggle with is
and sort of a little bit behind the
theory or neuroscience behind why that
person is stuck in a particular way
and then ultimately share a little bit
about how that person was able to move
forward
so for today's case study i want to
share a case about
bullying and social anxiety um that has
to do with someone from our community a
guy named adam so adam is a 21 year old
caucasian
male who was actually one year ahead
in school and was bullied a lot and
eventually developed social anxiety and
we're going to go through a little bit
about how that process works
what happens in the brain during social
anxiety and then eventually
share a little bit about how adam was
sort of able to overcome his social
anxiety
so to begin with adam um was actually a
little bit precocious
so started school early and so was
actually one year younger than a lot of
his
colleagues so early on um tended to get
made fun of a lot
and uh wasn't quite as good at sports
probably because he was
a year younger than everyone else and so
adam
describes a very vivid memory of him
being seven years old
and maybe in the second or third grade
um and every day that when he went out
to recess he would be like
super careful because there were a
couple of kids that would bully him
and so he really remembers like enjoying
recess but also dreading recess
because he wasn't sure whether he was
going to get bullied or not
and generally speaking it wasn't a
problem in the classroom because
teachers were around but on recess
you know no one really did anything when
he got pushed around
so he remembers a really distinct uh
time where he went out to play
and then he remembers kind of this this
image of there's a particular person who
bullied him
and then he remembers kind of this
semi-circle of other kids that would
watch
and so what usually happens when a kid
gets bullied is you know there's one kid
who's doing the bullying and one kid
who's the
the victim and then a lot of other kids
are watching
so i want you guys to pause for a second
and just kind of envision this you know
there's a seven-year-old kid with an
eight-year-old who's like bigger than
him
more popular than him and is about to
make fun of him and a lot of the other
kids actually know what's gonna happen
right because bullies are gonna like
advertise that they're about to bully
someone
and other people are going to kind of
join in for the entertainment or just to
watch
and so what happens in the brain of the
seven-year-old at that point what
happens in adam's brain
and so i want to share a couple of
different uh
parts of the brain and explain those so
we can understand a little bit about
what happens
in bullying and then eventually how that
leads to social anxiety
so the first part of the brain that i
want to explain is something called the
amygdala
the amygdala is a really primitive
structure in our brain and
what primitive means is that it serves a
really basic
um function and is sort of even in like
animals and stuff the amygdala is pretty
much the same
so the amygdala is our fear and survival
center
it's the part of our brain that
activates when we're afraid and it's the
part of our brain that sort of
prepares us to survive conflict right
next to the amygdala
is uh the limbic system as a whole
and the limbic system is sort of our
emotional circuitry and so that's
so the amygdala experiences fear and the
limbic system as a whole sort of
experiences all of our
other emotions also relatively primitive
or older structure in the brain
and then the next structure that i want
to talk about is the hippocampus
and the hippocampus is our learning
center for the brain
the really interesting thing is if you
look at the the neuroanatomy of it the
amygdal and the hippocampus are right
next to each other
and the reason for that is because one
of the most powerful ways we learn
is through negative experience so you
can understand this really simply
because
if you think about let's say a
restaurant that you like you've eaten
there a dozen times and you really
enjoyed it
and if you eat there once and get food
poisoning
it's going to be really hard to go to
that restaurant again even though like
less than 10 percent of the time you
actually get sick all it takes is one
bad experience
for your brain to learn that oh we want
to avoid that
right and that's absolutely a survival
mechanism because we wanted to learn you
know we wanted to learn very quickly if
something was
harmful to us we didn't want to be slow
learners with negative things
which is also kind of tricky because we
learned so quickly from
from punishment and negative experiences
which is actually exactly what happened
in adam's case
so let's kind of go back to adam now
that we understand these three parts of
the brain
and what happens when he sort of faces
off against his bully
is that his amygdala activates so he
kind of goes into survival mode he may
start to panic a little bit
but as the amygdala activates it turns
on this sort of
symphony of physiologic and
neurologic responses that are kind of
what i call the danger circuit so his
danger circuit activates
so his blood pressure increases his
heart rate increases his pupils dilate
muscle uh blood rushes to his muscles
and sort of prepares him for survival
and blood moves away from other things
too and this becomes really important
so when our amygdala activates and our
primitive structures activate
what they actually do is shut off
our more advanced parts of the brain
so our cerebral cortex is a lot of what
makes us human
so the the outer parts of our brain is
where we get a lot of our analytical
thinking
a lot of our kind of complex
understanding of things a lot of our
problem solving capabilities
a lot a lot of our ability to see things
in nuance or shades of gray
so when the amygdala sort of activates
we sort of
turn to animalistic or primal responses
as opposed to sophisticated ways of
looking at things
and that's absolutely a survival
mechanism as well
because we want sophisticated thought
when we're kind of like calm and not in
danger
and we want black and white thinking and
instant responses when we're in danger
because it's kind of a life-and-death
situation
so our neurology is actually uh
designed to shut off our ability to
critically think
and analyze situations in a rational way
when our amygdala activates
and so what going kind of back to the
playground so our amygdala activates so
his cerebral cortices shut off and then
you know he starts to learn a really
important lesson which is that when
everyone is looking at me
i'm in danger right so he wants to start
to avoid
being seen because being seen is being
targeted
and eventually what happens is as this
happens again and again and so he gets
pushed to the ground and stuff like that
he starts to cry everyone laughs at him
it's an incredibly traumatic experience
and so his hippocampus is like hey
anytime people are looking at us this is
a real problem
and so the bully continues to pick on
him and then he also discovers something
else that's really really important
which is that if he's ever the center of
attention
and even for a good thing so like let's
say he shows up so he
told me a story about how um he showed
up one day with a
a psp right so he was like showing
everyone his psp on the playground
and so like in that moment everyone's
like super impressed with like his
his gaming console and so he's the
center of attention
and sure enough what happens is the
bully walks over
and once the bully sees that he's the
center of attention he doesn't like that
so he starts to put him down
starts to bully him again things like
that thankfully he didn't like lose his
psp or anything
um but eventually what what he learns is
through each of these experiences that
are a little bit traumatic
his hippocampus is is learning right
he's learning
a very very important lesson which is
that like it's important to be invisible
it's safe to be invisible we don't want
you know we don't want to be seen
because whenever we're seen
even though not whenever but ninety
percent of the time we can be fine when
we're seen but all it takes is ten
percent of the time for us to learn to
completely avoid that behavior
and so over time his body wires
his brain wires to avoid being seen
and so as he continues to grow older and
older and older
you know that wiring is is kind of
really deep
rooted and sort of formed when he was
really young so as he goes through his
teenage years he starts to feel really
awkward and then he winds up sort of
eventually being 21
and he's incredibly socially anxious and
he finds that any time he goes into a
social situation
where he's seen he feels targeted right
and so what happens he goes like
he'll go to a party where like no one
even knows who he is and if anyone
when he opens the door he told me this
really distinct memory of like
he's going to a party for the first time
he opens the door and what is what do
people do when you open a door everyone
looks at the door
and in that moment when people look at
the door
what happens in his brain his
hippocampus is like hey
we've been here before everyone's
looking at us there are eight pairs of
eyes on us
right now and that means we're in danger
and so it activates his amygdala
it activates his limbic system it
activates his sympathetic nervous system
he starts to get flushed with adrenaline
and he starts to feel
like he's in danger now if we stop and
we think about this for a second
we'd think like oh this is social
anxiety this is a mental illness
right but if we really pay attention
what we discover is that
this isn't his brain malfunctioning this
is his brain
functioning the way that it was supposed
to this is his brain
learning that vaccine is to be targeted
and so what what happens is each time he
kind of goes into these social
situations
there are signals in his brain telling
him hey man we're in danger because
people are looking at us
and so he tries his best to kind of
overcome that right so what he does is
he he tries to convince himself
that his you know it's not really a
problem and he has these like little
arguments or wars with himself he goes
into battle with his
own mind before he gets to the party
while he's at the party
every instinct in his body is telling
him to run run run
but he says no i'm not going to have any
friends if i run away and then he's just
kind of tortured
and if we really look at it why does
that argument not
work very well it's because remember the
amygdala is shutting off his cerebral
vortex so even though he's trying to
argue with himself
there are actually inhibitory signals
from his
amygdala to his cerebral cortex that are
preventing it from acting fully
so even though he's arguing against
himself
the parts of his brain that come up with
good arguments the parts of his brain
that can convince him of things and can
actually change are actually being shut
off by the amygdala
which is why he feels so tortured at
home right because when he's
at home he can really see things
logically because his cortices are
actually
functioning and so he he convinces
himself he's like okay i'm going to go
to the party today i'm going to be fine
it's all in my head there's no big deal
and and that feels real to him in that
moment because his cortices are active
and his amygdala is shut off but the
second he walks in that door the second
he opens the door and those eight pairs
of eyes
swivel and target him that part of the
brain shuts off his cortex shuts off and
the amygdala turns on
and then all of his logic and all of his
thinking go completely out the window
and so he struggles with this immensely
beats himself up all the time and is
always kind of telling himself
i don't know why i'm this way i figured
it out i can be calm
i know that it's not a problem and then
the second that people start to look at
him
whether it's raising his hand in class
or going to a party
everything gets triggered and so he
starts to become really frustrated with
himself he also
you know turns to the computer because
he can form social connections there
and why is it that he's okay talking
online or interacting with people on
games or social media
it's because literally the hippocampus
has learned that
eyes looking at me is the problem that's
what indicates danger
and so the cool thing about the internet
and also the addicting thing about the
internet the thing that sort of keeps
him trapped
but also offers him salvation is that on
the internet that danger signal doesn't
activate because the danger signal is
activated by pairs of eyes looking at me
it's not actually activated by a
computer screen and so while he
interacts with people online he's
completely fine
because his cortex is working fine his
amygdala is shut off that trigger
doesn't flip the switch
and so what do we do for adam right so
he's kind of 21 years old
spends a lot of time on his computer all
of his social connections are through
online communities and so what did we do
for him so that the key thing it comes
down to the neuroscience right so the
first thing that we had to explain to
adam is that
first of all dude you're not busted
there's nothing wrong with you this is
just
your brain kind of miscalibrated right
it's like your brain has learned a
particular thing and so all we need to
do is like
unlearn it and and learn something else
and the more that i was explaining
able to explain that to adam something
really cool happened is that
he used to beat himself up and then all
of that negative emotion
all of that frustration and all of that
shame
makes it really hard to rewire your
brain and learn something new
right it's really hard to move forward
in life when all you feel is like shame
and frustration with yourself
so the first thing is to explain to him
hey man like you're not busted you can
actually change this
it's just this is what happened to you
and this is how your brain wired because
you used to be in danger
so that actually helped a lot the second
thing that we did is we taught him how
to meditate and more important than than
sort of teaching him how to meditate in
and of itself
is that we um helped him notice his
reaction
and so what he was able to do is like
observe that like
mentally prepare and observe it's not
that he was going to try to force
himself to do anything
because forcing himself to do something
just led to failure and frustration
and each time he forces himself he fails
feels more ashamed
and then he has to force himself harder
and force himself harder and with each
failure comes more shame
and a higher problem to overcome and it
was a vicious cycle so we had to break
that cycle
and the way that we break that cycle is
by not trying to succeed but just by
trying to notice
so i started to tell adam is the next
time you go to a party if you feel like
turning around and walking away just
turn around and walk away if you feel
embarrassed about it
no big deal we're gonna meet every week
you know for
therapy anyway so you can just tell me
about your feelings and we'll work on
those
all i want you to do is notice what
happens to you
okay so when you walk inside the door
prepare yourself for it
recognize that there's a part of your
brain that's going to turn on and is
going to drive you absolutely crazy
and recognize that these are primitive
really important survival mechanisms
that are designed
to control your behavior these are the
mechanisms that protected your ancestors
from
tigers and snakes and other predators so
of course they're going to be powerful
and you may not be able to control it
just see what happens and so something
really cool happens
when he starts noticing it so he does
lose some of those battles which is
completely fine right because we want to
teach him
to not be ashamed of failure and to let
him practice
more because it takes practice but what
he starts to realize is he starts to see
that oh okay this is just a physiologic
reaction
and sometimes it's going to take control
of me
and the more he starts to notice it the
more it actually starts to subside which
is really really bizarre
so instead of getting caught up in it he
sort of sees it run its course so it
starts to activate
he's he knows that he's gonna feel like
sweaty he knows that he's gonna feel
you know very constricted he's gonna
feel tightness in his chest and he's
like okay
here comes the tightness and he watches
it and it rises and the more he watches
it
the more he actually doesn't react to it
the more he
doesn't engage in a war against it and
try to control it
the more it starts to just kind of
wither and melt away
and then he comes upon a really
important discovery which is that
when he fights his anxiety it actually
fuels it
and by noticing it and letting it be it
starts to naturally just kind of subside
because it doesn't have that sort of
conflict to fuel it the other thing that
happens in the brain so we're sort of
telling him to do this but we're also
being a little bit sneaky
because noticing comes from your frontal
lobes in your cerebral cortex
so when i ask him to notice what we're
actually doing is
activating the parts of his brain that
are actually going to help him overcome
the anxiety
we're we're turning on the very things
that the amygdala turns off
and there are numerous studies that show
that especially the frontal lobes
which are the parts of our brain that
let us plan and execute an action right
when i set an intention
i set a goal and i follow through with
our goal that comes from the frontal
lobes
so when he sets an intention to go to
the party follow through comes from the
frontal lobes
and the frontal lobes get shut off by
the amygdala along with the cortices
so when we're asking him to notice what
we're literally doing is flipping the on
switch on his frontal lobes
which allow him to set a goal and follow
through to it
and over time the a third thing happens
which is that
his hippocampus starts to learn that oh
every time i open a door nothing bad
happens
and so i actually don't need to be in
danger
and so by activating his frontal lobes
by
reducing his self-judgment by giving him
the capacity to fail and tuck his tail
between his legs and run away
and not letting him feel ashamed about
that what we actually do is we
desensitize him
to the social situation right we help
his brain actually rewire
and about after about six to eight
months of really kind of focusing on
this
you know he walked into my office one
day and said you know what i actually
have no problem going to parties now
i still feel that anxiety but the
anxiety doesn't control me so now what i
do is i i kind of go in
and i'll like just kind of be by myself
for like 10 or 15 minutes
and i'll let the anxiety kind of subside
and then i'm fine for the rest of the
night
and so what we can really take away from
this is that you know if you have social
anxiety
a lot of times it comes from roots
earlier in your life
and if you really understand the
neuroscience if you really understand
the biology
and you really understand the process
you can go about
systematically dismantling it and i
really hope
that this case study illustrates that
and if you guys struggle with
anxiety i hope this is helpful and i
encourage you guys to follow adam's same
same process which is you know let
yourself fail first and foremost
and if you feel ashamed notice that
shame the second thing is to notice
the social anxiety process and don't
fight with it
and don't give in to it as best as you
can just notice it
and as you do that something magical
will happen which is that the anxiety
will start to subside
it's not going to be around forever
that's just not how our brain works
right
you're only anxious at the party and the
anxiety is going to go away
so i really hope that you guys enjoy
this kind of content if you do
you know please give us feedback and
we'll present more case studies
so take care and thank you very much
adios from dr k